## Chapter[0] = "Introduction";

### Why You Should Learn Sockets Programming
HTTP is good at a lot of things. It is a simple and intuitive protocol, so perhaps it's not a surprise that it is the most commonly used protocol for Internet traffic. Because HTTP is so commonplace, there is a lot of documentation and libraries available for it. In fact, most languages natively include HTTP libraries in their standard libraries!

However, the truth is that HTTP was designed for documents, back in the good ol' days when webpages were just simple formatted text. Technically, you can transfer just about anything over HTTP, including images, video, and even executables; but as the old adage goes, _just because you can, doesn't mean you should_. HTTP is not the wisest choice for transferring certain kinds of data.

For those cases where you _should not_, we need to dig deeper. We need to be able to program with other less-supported application-layer protocols, and perhaps even design some of our own. For this, we need sockets programming. Sockets--with the exception of Raw Sockets--provide the functionality of routing data throughout the global internet, but give us a blank canvas on what to transmit. In fact, a blank canvas is a pretty good analogy for what a socket is, when compared to HTTP programming. HTTP programming can be thought of as a form, in which you fill out pre-defined fields in a very structured manner; sockets programming is like an empty canvas, upon which you can paint whatever you want.

### Why You Should Do Sockets Programming in D
I've learned a lot of programming languages, and from all of those I have reviewed, D is the best. It carries on the traditions of C and C++, but still manages to be mostly backwards-compatible. It is easy to read and intuitive, expanding on some of the unfriendly abbreviations used in C and C++; for example, what C refers to as 'in_addr', D refers to as 'InternetAddress'. Remember that C was invented at a time where computer screens were black and green and were only 80 characters wide; with that little screen real-estate, you really have to economize characters! But nowadays, your average developer is strapped into a crazy iMax dome of 55-inch monitors. For that reason, it is not characters, but readability that is scarce now. For clarity, no compiled language I know of beats D (although Java is a close runner-up).

I also believe that D is obvious heir to the C kingdom. IEEE studies show that C is the most common programming language, followed by C++, then Java. All of these languages ultimately descend from C. When C came out, everything was written in C. When C++ came out, developers wrote many new things in C++, but still kept the C programs around.

I can tell you, as a guy very well certified and experienced with Linux system administration, that many of the technologies Linux uses have reached the end of their life span. Try Sendmail, for instance. Good luck finding documentation or support if you need it. Other programs have reached the end of their lifespan simply because they are not up to par with modern technologies. Consider 'sed' as an example. It is a handy little tool, for sure, but scripting with it is a nightmare, to be frank. It does not use regular expressions--it uses its own little strange language. I'm sure many modern developers would like to add features and documentation for these programs, but these programs are forty years old and written in thousands of lines of C, making it an immense chore to thoroughly understand even the most banal program.

My point in saying this is that a lot of these programs are about to be replaced, if they are not already. Many replacements already exist in C++. Ultimately, C will be phased out, C++ will be legacy, and D will become the prince of programming. It is only obvious: C++ advanced C while remaining backwards-compatible, and now D advanced C++, but remains backwards-compatible with both C++ and C.

Already, some major companies, such as Facebook, use D programming. I think as more companies see the wisdom, and as the documentation gets better, you'll see D skyrocket. I give it about five years before it exceeds Rust in popularity.

So why should you learn Sockets Programming in D, specifically? Because sockets programming is something almost any serious program needs, few people know how to do it in depth, and D is the rising star in which it will be programmed. By getting into sockets programming now, you're like one of the early investors in Apple. One way or another, knowing sockets programming in great depth will make you a very valuable person.

### What Sockets Programming Looks Like in Other Languages
I gave you an example of what sockets programming in C looks like. By comparing two words, you can already see the difference in legibility between C and D sockets programming.

---

For example, here is a simple one-socket server with no error-handling written in D:

```
import std.socket;
import std.stdio;

void main(string[] args) {
    char[1024] message;
    Socket server = new TcpSocket();
    server.bind(new InternetAddress(4444));
    server.listen(1);
    writefln("Listening on port 4444");
    while (true) {
        Socket client = server.accept();
        auto dataLength = client.receive(message[]);
        if (dataLength != 0) {
            writefln("Received message: %s", message);
        }
    }
}
```

---

Now here is roughly the same thing, but written in C:

```
#include<stdio.h>
#include<string.h>
#include<arpa/inet.h>
#include<sys/socket.h>
#include<unistd.h>

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
    char message[1024];
    int read_size;
    struct sockaddr_in server;
    struct sockaddr_in client;
    int socket_desc = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);
    server.sin_family = AF_INET;
    server.sin_addr.s_addr = INADDR_ANY;
    server.sin_port = htons(4444);
    listen(socket_desc, 3);
    puts("Listening on port 4444");
    int socket_size = sizeof(struct sockaddr_in);
    int client_sock = accept(socket_desc, (struct sockaddr *)&client, (socklen_t*)&socket_size);
    puts("Connection accepted");
    while( (read_size = recv(client_sock, message, 1024, 0)) > 0 ) {
        putf("Received message: %s\n", message);
    }
    return 0;
}
```

---

As you can see, we have come a long way.

### Who this book is for

I expect the reader to have a modicum of programming experience, but not much more than that. In the next chapter, I will review some basics of D programming. If you are very familiar with C, C++, C#, Java, or any similar language, you can probably skip the next chapter safely, but after reviewing those concepts, I won't hesitate to apply them generously.
